Spec 0.2.1 (#7)
ocwg/spec: spec/spec-0.2.md

|------------|-----------|--------------------|--------------|-------------------------------------|-----------|
| `id`       | `string`  | [ID](#id)          | **required** | A unique identifier for the node.   | n/a       |
| `position` | `array`   | number[]           | recommended  | Coordinate as (x,y) or (x,y,z).     | [0,0]     |
| `size`     | `array`   | number[]           | recommended  | The size of the node per dimension. | n/a       |
| `resource` | `string`  | [ID](#id)          | optional     | The resource to display             |           |
| `data`     | `array`   | array of Extension | optional     | Extended node data                  |           |
| `rotation` | `number`  | [Angle](#angle)    | optional     | +/- 360 degrees                     | `0`       |
| `scale`    | `array`   | number[]           | optional     | Scale factors to resize nodes       | `[1,1,1]` |

- **id**: A unique identifier for the node. Must be unique within an OCIF file.  See [ID](#ocif-types) type for details.

- **position**: The position of the node on the canvas.
  - Required are **x** (at position `0`) and **y** (at position `1`). Optional is **z** at position `2`.

>   - The _coordinate system_ has the x-axis pointing to the right, the y-axis pointing down, and the z-axis pointing away from the screen. This is the same as in CSS, SVG, and most 2D and 3D graphics libraries. The origin is the top-left corner of the canvas.

Author: Yes. Fixed.

    - Size might be omitted if a linked resource defines the size. E.g., raster images such as PNG an JPEG define their size in pixels. SVG can have a `viewbox` defined, but may also omit it. Text can be wrapped at any width, so a size property is clearly required. In general, a size property is really useful as a fall-back to display at least a kind of rectangle, if the resource cannot be displayed as intended. Size can only be omitted if _all_ resource representations define a size.

- **data**: Additional properties of the node. 
A node may have any number of extensions. Each extension is a JSON object with a `type` property. 
See [extensions](#extensions).

- **resource**: A reference to a resource, which can be an image, video, or audio file. See [resources](#resources).
    - Resource can be empty, in which case a node is acting as a transform for other nodes.

- **rotation**: The 2D rotation of the node in degrees. The rotation center is the positioned point, i.e., top-left. The z-Axis is not modified.

- **scale**: Allows to re-scale a given node. This is particularly useful if a [parent-child](#parent-child-relation)

> ## Ports Extension

Author: No, scale is part of the core spec. But optional

This is an [extension](#extensions) for a node. To be placed inside the `data` `array`. It provides the familiar concept of _ports_ to a node. A port is a point, which allows geometrically controlling where, e.g. arrows are attached to a shape.

- Name: `@ocwg/node/ports`
- URI: `https://spec.canvasprotocol.org/node/ports/0.2`

> Any node can act as a port. The 'container' node uses the _Ports Extension_ to define which nodes it uses as ports.

Author: I made a mistake with the node ids. Fixed.

The _Ports Extension_ has the following properties:

| Property | JSON Type | OCIF Type | Required     | Contents                          | Default |
|----------|-----------|-----------|--------------|-----------------------------------|---------|
| `ports`  | `array`   | [ID](#id) | **required** | IDs of nodes acting as ports.     |         |

**Example:**   
A node (n1) with two ports (p1, p2)
```json
{
  "nodes": [
    {
      "id": "n1",
      "position": [100, 100],
      "size": [100, 100],
      "data": [
        {
          "type": "@ocwg/node/ports",
          "ports": ["n2", "n3"]
        }
      ]
    },
    {
      "id": "p1",
      "position": [200, 200]
    },
    {
      "id": "p2",

>       "position": [300, 300]

Author: Good catch

- **members**: A list of IDs of nodes (or relations, such as other groups) that are part of the group.

**Semantics**  
- Groups can contain groups as members. Thus, all semantics apply recursively.
- When a group is deleted, all members are deleted as well.
- When a group is 'ungrouped,' the group itself is deleted, but its members remain.
- When a member is deleted, it is removed from the group. 
 

## Parent-Child Relation
A parent-child relation models a hierarchical relationship between nodes.
It can be used to model inheritance, containment, or other hierarchical relationships.

- Name: `@ocwg/rel/parent-child`
- URI: `https://spec.canvasprotocol.org/rel/parent-child/0.2`

| Property  | JSON Type | OCIF Type | Required     | Contents                  | Default |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|--------------|---------------------------|:--------|
| `parent`  | `string`  | [ID](#id) | **required** | ID of the parent node.    |         |
| `child`   | `string`  | [ID](#id) | **required** | ID of the child node.     |         |
| `ìnherit` | `boolean` |           | optional     | Inherit properties.       | `false` |

> 

Author: I think this is a good intention, but a larger question to discuss. 

- Having optional description fields could be beneficial in many more places. 
- An automatic import has a hard time to understand a human-language description reliably
- If tool A exports, and tool B re-exports, should tool B overwrite the description field with its understood semantics?

They allow adding custom data to nodes, relations, and resources.

- An extension is a JSON object (used as a "property bag") with one mandatory property: `type`.
Thus, `type` is a reserved property key. 
All other property keys can be used by the extension.
- Arbitrary, nested JSON structures are allowed.
- Extensions SHOULD define how the base properties play together with the extension properties and with other (known) extensions.
- Nodes and relations can have multiple extensions within their `data` array.
- Each extension is an object with a `type` property.

| Property | JSON Type | OCIF Type                                  | Required     | Contents          |
|----------|-----------|:-------------------------------------------|--------------|-------------------|
| `type`   | `string`  | [Schema Name](#schema-name) or [URI](#uri) | **required** | Type of extension |

- **type**: The type of the extension. This is a URI or a simple name.
  If a name is used, that name must be present in the [schemas](#schemas) section, where it is mapped to a URI.

For an example of an extension, see the [appendix](#appendix), [Node Extension: Circle](#node-extension-circle).

> ## Defining Extensions

Reviewer: I expected to see a table here rather than the bulleted list of recommendations. Was that omitted on purpose?

An extensions MUST have a URI (as its ID) and a document describing the extension.

It SHOULD have a version number, as part of its URI.
SHOULD have a proposed name, and SHOULD have a JSON schema.

The proposed structure is to use a directory in a git repository. 
The directory path should contain a name and version number.
Within the repo, there SHOULD be two files:

- README.md, which describes the extension.
- schema.json, which contains the JSON schema for the extension.
    - This schema MUST use the same URI as the extension.
    - It SHOULD have a `description` property, describing briefly the purpose of the extension.

As an example, look at the [Circle Extension](#node-extension-circle) in the appendix.

## Exporting Data with Extensions
When exporting an OCIF file using extensions, the application SHOULD use inline or external schemas for the extensions.
Remote schemas CAN be used to save space in the OCIF file.

> ## Handling Extension Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Preserving Extension Data
```

We also use the syntax `ID[]` to refer to a JSON `array`, in which each member is an _ID_.

Here is the catalog of types used throughout the document:

#### Angle
A `number` that represents an angle in degrees, from -360 to 360.
The angle is measured in degrees, with positive values indicating a clockwise rotation and negative values indicating a counterclockwise rotation.
Numbers outside the range of -360 to 360 are allowed, but they are normalized to the range by adding or subtracting 360 until the value is within the range.

#### ID
A `string` that represents a unique identifier. 
It must be unique among all IDs used in an OCIF document.
The ID space is shared among nodes, relations, and resources.

#### MIME Type
A `string` that represents the _MIME Type_ for a resource. 
Typical examples in a canvas are `text/plain`, `text/html`, `image/svg+xml`, `image/png`, `image/jpeg`, `video/mp4`. 
IANA content type registry: https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml

#### Node
An `object` representing a visual [node](#nodes).

#### Relation
An `object` representing a [relation](#relations).

#### Representation

> An `object` representing a [resource](#resources) representation.
> 
> #### Resource
> An `array` of [resource](#resources).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `object` with a single [representation](#representation) of a [resource](#resources) .

#### Resource
An `object` representing a hypermedia [resource](#resources).
```
